---
title: 'A Beginner's Guide to Dialing in Espresso (work in progress)'
date: 2024-08-09
permalink: /posts/esp
---

> Understanding the brewing process is the key to good coffee!

If you are a coffee lover and you happen to make your own espresso at home, you must have read about the so-called gold standard of extracting about 1:2 yield ratio within 25 to 30 seconds. However, do you know which variables to tweak when your espresso does not look good or taste good? If you don't, I believe you will after reading this blog.

# Variables to Play with in the World of Espresso

In espresso making, there are many variables you get to play with, and each contributes to your final cup of coffee. Some basic ones include grind size, the amount of coffee you use, the type of coffee beans you use, water temperature and yield. To pull a decent espresso shot, you'll need to tune these variables to ahieve the best flavor. 

But before I get into each one of the variables, let's first think about what's really happening in the brewing process. If you use a semi-automatic espresso machine, the usual workflow would be

1. grinding coffee beans
2. puck prep and tamping
3. locking in the portafilter and letting water through

Essentially, the extraction process allows water, as a solvent, to resolve the chemicals within the coffee and bring them into the cup. The tricky part is to know the extent the coffee is extracted. Just like cooking a steak, you have to know when to stop the heat to prevent either undercooking or overcooking. There are exact matching terms in espresso, that is underextraction and overextraction. Then the next question would be: how is extraction influenced by various variables?


